# 04. The aftermath

Kavi rested his head against the tree trunk. _Just a few minutes,_ he thought.

The tree trunk forked into two, providing a comfortable cocoon to nestle into.

_Just a bit of rest. Two minutes more,_ he promised himself.

His tubby frame could rarely keep up with his friends during their daily game of football. But his mind ran free as his eyes drooped shut. He imagined himself walking softly through glades, wading through rivers, tracking bird calls and pug marks in search of an elusive tiger. The darkness of the night assumed the form of fearsome beasts and brave hunters, before dissipating back into nothingness.

***

Kavi awoke with a start. His ill-advised adventures must have tired him out more than he imagined. Had the moon moved higher into the night sky? How long had he been asleep?

A sharp breeze sprang up, sending chills down his spine. Kavi remembered that he was wearing just a long-sleeved cotton shirt—in an act of defiance, he had left behind his thick sweater that Ma made him wear whenever _she_ was feeling cold. It also got caught in brambles and branches, and everyone knew that that while in the wilds, one had to be quiet and stealthy. The final nail—it was electric blue. Not exactly subtle.

_Maybe I will wear it if I go exploring in a submarine,_ Kavi thought, _with Captain Nemo! We will see sharks, and blue whales, and giant squid!_

Another gust of wind cut short his musings. He pulled the shawl tighter. It seemed heavier now, blocking the wind from neck to knee. His face was still unprotected. As soon as he realized this, a torn edge of the blanket fluttered onto his face. Kavi wrapped it over his nose, wrinkling it in anticipation. But instead of being musty, the blanket smelt of pine trees and apples.

He stood up on shaky feet. Time to walk back to their cottage.
