---
title: Ask Swami, 17 March 2019
---

## Soundcloud link
https://soundcloud.com/vedantany/ask-swami-3172019
1 hour 24 minutes

<iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" allow="autoplay" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/soundcloud%253Atracks%253A591646464&color=%23ff5500&auto_play=false&hide_related=false&show_comments=true&show_user=true&show_reposts=false&show_teaser=true"></iframe><div style="font-size: 10px; color: #cccccc;line-break: anywhere;word-break: normal;overflow: hidden;white-space: nowrap;text-overflow: ellipsis; font-family: Interstate,Lucida Grande,Lucida Sans Unicode,Lucida Sans,Garuda,Verdana,Tahoma,sans-serif;font-weight: 100;"><a href="https://soundcloud.com/vedantany" title="Vedanta Talks" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">Vedanta Talks</a> · <a href="https://soundcloud.com/vedantany/ask-swami-3172019" title="Ask Swami 3/17/2019" target="_blank" style="color: #cccccc; text-decoration: none;">Ask Swami 3/17/2019</a></div>

## Question 1
In your fifth lecture about the Gita, you talked about some people having memories of their past lives. When a human being dies, his or her body and mind are left behind. But how can one remember one's past lives if one has a completely new body and mind? And if Brahman is _nishkriya_, what is it that carries those memories?


## Question 2: 05:44
### Question
In the Bhagavad Gita, verse [[Bhagavad Gita 15(7)|15(7)]], Krishna says, "The living entities in this conditioned world are my eternal fragmented parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the six senses which include the mind." 
It makes sense to know that as a soul, I have an individual existence, and therefore my liberation or removal of ignorance has to be worked out individually. And when the subtle body which covers the soul that I am is done with, I will exist as pure light or _brahman_. However, according to Advaita, we are all one _brahman_. So how is it that this One is covered with millions and zillions of subtle and gross bodies, and how is that removal of ignorance to be worked out separately for each? [... why individual removal of ignorance when we are One]

### Answer
Oh! Very big question.

>[!NOTE]- Swamiji illustrates how big the question is, using an anecdote
> I remember when I was a young monk, I visited one of the schools of Tibetan Buddhism. I was wandering in north India. In a place called Dehradun, on the road to Mussoorie, there is a big Tibetan monastery. I visited that.
> 
> I remember asking this question about the relationship between Advaita Vedanta and Tibetan Buddhism. I met the head of the monastery, who was the head of a particular sect of Tibetan Buddhists called [Sakya Pa](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sakya). 
> 
> There was a long queue of people taking his blessings—he is a spiritual leader for thousands of people. I was in the queue as a sort of honored visitor. I told him which lineage I come from, and I asked him this question: What is the relationship—similarities and dissimilarities—between Advaita Vendata and Tibetan Buddhism?
> 
> He know what I was asking. He was a very gracious and wise man. Enormous, powerfully built! He was sitting and he looked down at me. With a huge grin, he said, "Big question! No time!"
> 
> I burst out laughing, and I said, "Some other time, maybe". Then I bowed down and withdrew.

So I will try to answer in brief. The real sting is in the tail. If you know Advaita polemics[^1], you know the question: _Agyana_ (or ignorance)—is it in Brahman, or is it in us, the Jeeva?

But before that, she (the questioner) asks—are we one or many? The Gita seems to say that we are many. The Lord says, "_Jeevas_ are fractions of my being." From that, the Vishishta Advaita philosophy can take off very well—that we are all parts of the Lord. 

So, are we one or many?

Obviously, as (gross) bodies, we are many. Just count! As subtle bodies—the thoughts, feelings, the person inside—many or one? Many! Just use common sense. Don't you feel that you are different from the person next to you? Of course! Your life stories, ideas, thoughts, likes, dislikes—they are all different.

So, as bodies we are different. Both our subtle bodies and our physical bodies. Clearly so!

But as the _atman_? As the pure consciousness? As that which we are trying to meditate upon—the vast, limitless sky of consciousness, within which all sensations arise and fall? Even the word limitless comes from _Satyam, Gyanam, Anantam Brahma_—pure being, pure awareness, and infinite.

If it is infinite, if it is limitless, can there be more than One? 

What is asking is: If the bodies are different, there there is limit. My body ends here, and yours begins there. They say that, "My freedom ends where my nose ends, and your nose begins."


These bodies are limited [^2]. 
- In space (`desha`). I occupy this chair, not that. 
- In time (`kala`). There was a time when I was born, and when I will die.
- As objects (`vastu`). One body is different from another.



So, limitation is there.

As minds, too, we are also limited. 

What do I mean by limit is -- this is this, not that.
But that one consciousness without distinction, without limit, how many infinites, how many things without limit can there be? One. Logically speaking.

Even if want to understand it phenomenologically—based on how it feels to you—clearly, the body feels different.  () Minds feel different. I don;t know it, I can esetimate it.

[13:03]
But if I am just the witness consciousness, without any distinguishing characteristic—in Sanskrit, _vishesha_. _Vishesha_ means that which distinguishes one from the other.
If there are no distinguishing characteristic, how will you say, "my infinite consciousness is different from your infinite consciousness?"? There is no "my" and "your". "My" and "your" comes only with the mind. From the Atman point of view, it is the same thing. Its One.

If I am the Atman or Brahman, how is it many? Just imagine this:

>[!NOTE]- Swamiji illustrates one appearing as many using "one sun -- many reflections in pots of water"
> There is one sun shining, reflected in multiple pots or buckets of water, reflected in dewdrops. You will see millions of reflections, all shining like the real sun.
> 
> So how many suns are there? You will say—one real sun, and many reflected ones.
> 
> So, just like the sun, when this consciousness is reflected in the mind, the one appears as many. When we feel conscious, feel aware—_Chidabhasa_ —that's not the real atman, not the real self.
> 
> As many minds, so many reflected consciousnesses. and that many _Jeevas_ (individual beings).

So, we are different at the level of the body, the mind, and the reflected consciousness that appears in the mind. But all that is possible because of one, limitless consciousness.

[14:29]
You sit, surrounded by mirrors in a barber shop. How many of you are there? Thousands? And 
Only one real face.
Really one, apparently many. Those "many" can be different.
Only because of the mirror.

So that's the answer to the first question. The second one is much more difficult.

[15:26]
She has touched upon a very deep point of nond dialectics -- debates with the dualists.

Where is ignorance or _maya_?
_Ashreya_
What is the locus? Where is the ignorance.

Brahman alone is real
Because of ignorance, we seem to be separate

If ig is in us. How did we come to exist.
Ig must be there before our individualized 
Ig must logically precede my own existence.
That means ig mustd be in brahman. But htat sounds very differre

Anynaya ashraya
mutual dependence
jeeva -- ig, ig -- jee

How can ignorance be in the absolute reality.
It is like sayign, there is darkness in the sun.

Two schools
- Vivarana school -- padmapadacharya. Ig is in brahman. But not the same status as brahman. It is basically the power of brahman, by which br is occluded or hidden. Maya is not a second reality apart from brahman,
- Bhanati school - Vachaspati Misra - ig is in us. Who feels ignorant. I! So ignorance is in me. Mutual interdependce (_beej ankuravat_) Chicken and egg problem. Beginningless series 

Agyan ko siddha mat kijiye, Agyan to katiye.

On this side -- there is the question, but no answer
On their side -- there is the answer, but no question.

## Question 3 19:57
There are two versis

7:15 and 7:16

7:15
ignorant will not find God. Not really fair. Some of

7:16
Desired money and material wealth

Asuri - demonic
The difference is the 
faith in God, and the one who does not.

First verse says
deluded by maya,
Feels that this world alone is real. Spirituality and religion is nonsense, this physical is all that is real. Material goals only are worth pursuing. 
Person completely involved in Samsara. Let alone knowledge, not even the possibility of somethign beyond Samara


Second verse
4 categories
1. _Aarta_: Those who are in distress. But not just in distress. Good people who, in distress, turn to God. Deep faith in God; who pray to God for help in their misery.
2. _Artarthi_: No distress, no problem -- but I want something more, and I turn to God in faith for it.
3. _Jigyasu_: Spiritual seekers. No distress, not even asking for anything in this world. But has a quest. Like Narendranath -- does God exist? or, who am I? Enquiry into self, or into God. Thoes with a spiritual quest.
4. _Gyaneecha_: The enlightened. The true devotee of God. Dearest to me, for he knows me in truth. For others, I am an article of faith.

Is it unfair?
Indian worldview
Multiple births, multiple chances! Time will come, in this life or the next. We are all ancient souls -- you just have to look into the eyes of a newborn baby to understand that it is a very ancient creature.

This is why Vedanta is not missionary. It is very patient -- take your time.

Swami Vivekananda says -- half seriously -- take your time. It is better not to take your time. If you are sensitive enough, you will realize the nature of this world. Why will you repeat it again and again?

74 mins.

[^1]: Polemics are strong, contentious attacks or defenses of a particular opinion, belief, or person. The term can refer to a specific speech or piece of writing that argues forcefully, or to the general practice of engaging in such heated debate. Definition courtesy Wikipedia.
[^2]: In Sanskrit, _desha, kala, vastu_. Swamiji often says: Brahman is _desha, kala, vastu parichheda shunya_; beyond separation due to space or location (_desha_), time (_kala_) and object (_vastu_). 